Documentation: Edits to document :- statements (#840)
dafny-lang/dafny: docs/_includes/Statements.md

is diagnosed as a label in which the user forgot the **label** keyword.

## Update with Failure Statement

> An update statement using `:-`   instead of `:=` exits execution of a method immediately if a failure is reported. This is a form of exceptional return from the calling method.

Author: OK

To use this form of update,
   * the caller must have a first output value whose type is failure-compatible

>    * if the RHS of the update-with-failure statement is a method call, the first output value of the callee must be failure-compatible

Author: Revised, here and elsewhere

   * if instead the RHS of the update-with-failure statement is one or more expressions, the first of these expressions must be a value with a failure-compatible type

A failure-compatible type is a type that has the following:
   * a predicate `predicate IsFailure()`
   * a method `method PropagateFailure() returns _X_ `: The type _X_ must be a failure-compatible type and must be the type of the first output of the caller.
   * a method `method Extract() returns _T_` where _T_ is some type for the value carried by the type.

> TODO: Why should PropagateFailure and Extract be functions?

Reviewer: In the proposed translation of `:-` in https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/issues/603, each of `PropagateFailure` and `Extract` can be either a function or a method. In either case, it should have no in-parameters (other than the receiver parameter). If it is a method, then it should have exactly one out-parameter.

There are two forms of failure-compatible types. One has an `Extract` member, the other does not. If the type has an `Extract` member, then it must be a function or method.

The type `_X_` can be anything. It need not be a failure-compatible type. (To be used with `:-` in a particular context, the type `_X_` must be assignable to the first out-parameter of the enclosing method, but that need not be a failure-compatible type.)

Rather than talking about `_X_` and `_T_` above (which isn't syntactically correct, anyway), I suggest simply saying:

* a compiled (that is, non-ghost) predicate (that is, function with a `bool` result type) `IsFailure()`
* a compiled function or compiled 1-out-parameter method `PropagateFailure()`
* either no member called `Extract`, or a function or compiled 1-out-parameter method `Extract()`

Note that `Extract()` can be either compiled or ghost, but it must agree with the first LHS of the `:-` statement.

> TODO: Why should PropagateFailure and Extract be functions?

Author: Revised

### RHS with method call

A common example of a failure-compatible type is the following:
```
datatype Outcome<T> =
| Success(value: T)
| Failure(error: string)
{
  predicate method IsFailure() {
    this.Failure?
  }
  function method PropagateFailure(): Outcome<U>
    requires IsFailure()
  {

>     Failure(this.error); // this is Outcome<U>.Failure(...)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Failure(this.error) // this is Outcome<U>.Failure(...)
```

Author: OK

  }
  function method Extract(): T
    requires !IsFailure()
  {
    this.value
  }
}
```

The use of this statement is best explained by an example:
```

> method callee(i: int) returns (r: Outcome<nat>, v: int)

Reviewer: Rename `caller` to `Caller` and `callee` to `Callee`.

Author: Here and elsewhere

{

>   if (i < 0) return Failure("negative")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if i < 0 { return Failure("negative"); }
```

>   if (i < 0) return Failure("negative")

Author: OK

  return Success(i), i+i;
}

method caller(i: int) returns (rr: Outcome<int>, k: int)
{
  var j: int;
  j, k :- callee(i);
  k := k + k;
}
```

> Suppose `caller` is called with an argument of `10`. Then `callee` is called with argument `10` and returns `r` and `v` of `Outcome<nat>.Success(10)` and `20`. Here `r.IsFailure()` is `false`, so control proceeds normally. The `j` is assigned the result of `r.Extract()`, which will be `10`, and `k` is assigned `20`. Control flow proceeds to the next line, where `k` now gets the value `40`.

Author: Done

> Suppose instead  `caller` is called with an argument of `-1`. Then `callee` is called with the value `-1` and returns `r` and `v` of `Outcome<nat>.Failure("negative")` and `-2`. Now `r.IsFailure()` is `true`, so control proceeds directly to return from `caller`. The output values of `caller`  (`rr` and `k`) get the values of `r.PropagateFailure()`, which is `Outcome<int>.Failure("negative")`, and `-2`. The rest of the body of `caller` is skipped. In addition, the first return value of `caller` is now a failure value, so the exceptional return will propagate up the call stack as long as there are callers with this first special output type and calls that use `:-`.

Reviewer: L304:

    The first out-parameter of `Caller` (`rr`) gets its value from `r.PropagateFailure()`.
    The other out-parameter (`k`) is not changed by the `:-` statement, so it will return from
    `Caller` with the value it has, which in the example is an arbitrary value.

It may be clearer to assign `k` (say, setting it to `5`) in `Caller` before the `:-` statement. Then, the text I proposed here will say

    The other out-parameter (`k`) is not changed by the `:-` statement, namely `5`.

> Suppose instead  `caller` is called with an argument of `-1`. Then `callee` is called with the value `-1` and returns `r` and `v` of `Outcome<nat>.Failure("negative")` and `-2`. Now `r.IsFailure()` is `true`, so control proceeds directly to return from `caller`. The output values of `caller`  (`rr` and `k`) get the values of `r.PropagateFailure()`, which is `Outcome<int>.Failure("negative")`, and `-2`. The rest of the body of `caller` is skipped. In addition, the first return value of `caller` is now a failure value, so the exceptional return will propagate up the call stack as long as there are callers with this first special output type and calls that use `:-`.

Reviewer: Also, L307 through L309 are true for this example, but doesn't apply if the `Caller` out-parameter had a different type. Therefore, I'd prefer to insert "`In this example,`" or something in L307.

> Suppose instead  `caller` is called with an argument of `-1`. Then `callee` is called with the value `-1` and returns `r` and `v` of `Outcome<nat>.Failure("negative")` and `-2`. Now `r.IsFailure()` is `true`, so control proceeds directly to return from `caller`. The output values of `caller`  (`rr` and `k`) get the values of `r.PropagateFailure()`, which is `Outcome<int>.Failure("negative")`, and `-2`. The rest of the body of `caller` is skipped. In addition, the first return value of `caller` is now a failure value, so the exceptional return will propagate up the call stack as long as there are callers with this first special output type and calls that use `:-`.

Author: I believe that in r, k :- ..., k is assigned whether or not the failure control path is taken.

There are several points to note.

>    * The first output value is special. It has a special type and that type indicates that exceptional returns from `:-` statements are permitted in the body of a method with this return type.

Author: Done

>    * The callee must also have this special return type. However, it does not have to be the same type as is used by the caller. It just has to be possible (perhaps through generic instantiation and type inference, as in this example) for the callee's `PropagateFailure` function to produce a value of the caller's first output type.

Reviewer: No. See my comment below about the relation of the types of caller and callee.

>    * The callee must also have this special return type. However, it does not have to be the same type as is used by the caller. It just has to be possible (perhaps through generic instantiation and type inference, as in this example) for the callee's `PropagateFailure` function to produce a value of the caller's first output type.

Author: Revised extensively

>    * In the statement `j, k :- callee(i);`, the type of `j` is not the type of the first return value from `callee`. Rather it is the return type of `Extract` applied to the first return value of `callee`.

Author: Done

   * A method like `callee` with a special first output type can still be used in the normal way:

> `r, k := callee(i)`. Now `r` gets the first output value from callee, of type `Outcome<nat>`. No special semantics or exceptional control paths apply. Subsequent code can do its own testing of the value of `r` and whatever other computations or control flow are desired.

Author: Done

>    * The caller and callee are here shown with 2 output arguments each. In fact they each can have any (positive) number of output arguments, as long as the first one has a failure-compatible type.

Author: Revised

> It is important to note the connection between the failure-compatible types used in the caller and callee. They do not have to be the same type, but they must be closely related, as it must be possible for the callee's `PropagateFailure` to return a value of the caller's failure-compatible type. In practice this means that one such failure-compatible type should be used for an entire program. If a Dafny program uses a library shared by multiple programs, the library should supply such a type and it should be used by all the client programs (and, effectively, all Dafny libraries). 

Reviewer: No, this is not true. The connection is that the first out-parameter of `Callee` must have a failure-compatible type whose result type is assignable to the first out-parameter of `Caller`. For example, the following example is legal:

```
datatype FailureCompatible = Make {
  predicate method IsFailure() { true }
  function method PropagateFailure(): int { 12 }
  method Extract() returns (r: real) { }
}

method Callee() returns (r: FailureCompatible) { }

method Caller() returns (x: int) {
  var s: real :- Callee();
  return 13;
}
```

> It is important to note the connection between the failure-compatible types used in the caller and callee. They do not have to be the same type, but they must be closely related, as it must be possible for the callee's `PropagateFailure` to return a value of the caller's failure-compatible type. In practice this means that one such failure-compatible type should be used for an entire program. If a Dafny program uses a library shared by multiple programs, the library should supply such a type and it should be used by all the client programs (and, effectively, all Dafny libraries). 

Author: Got that-- revised throughout accordingly.

It is also the case that it is inconvenient to mix types such as `Outcome` above and `VoidOutcome` below.

### RHS with expression list

> Instead of a failure-returning method call on the RHS of the statement, the RHS can instead be a list of expressions. As for a `:=` statement, in this form, there must be the same number of expressions on the left and right sides of `:-`. The semantics is very similar to that in the previous subsection. 

Author: Done

   * The first RHS expression must have a failure-compatible type.
   * All the assignments of RHS expressions to LHS values except for the first value are made.

>    * If the first RHS value (say `r`) responds `true` to `r.IsFailure()`, then `r.PropagateFailure()` is assigned to the first output value of the _caller_ and the execution of the caller's body is ended.

Author: Done

>    * If the first RHS value (say `r`) responds `false` to `r.IsFailure()`, then `r.Extract()` is assigned to the first LHS value of the `:-` statement. Execution of the caller's body continues with the statement following the `:-` statement.

Author: Done

### Types without Extract

> An alternative form of the above behavior allows the failure-compatible type to omit the `Extract` method, A typical example would be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative form of the above behavior allows the failure-compatible type to omit the `Extract` method.
A typical example is
```

Author: OK

```
datatype VoidOutcome =
| Success
| Failure(error: string)
{
  predicate method IsFailure() {
    this.Failure?
  }
  function method PropagateFailure(): VoidOutcome
    requires IsFailure()
  {
  Failure(this.error); // this is Outcome<U>.Failure(...)
  }
}
```

> Such a type also counts as a failure-compatible type for the purposes of a `:-` statement. However, now there is no `Extract` method and no value carried along with `Success`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such a type also counts as a failure-compatible type for the purposes of a `:-` statement.
However, now there is no `Extract` method and no value carried along with `Success`.
```

Author: Done

> The same exceptional return semantics apply. The only difference is that the list of LHS values now must omit what would be the first l-value, as there is no extracted value for it to get. Thus there may be no LHS values at all.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The same exceptional return semantics apply.
The only difference is that the list of LHS values now must omit what would be the first l-value,
as there is no extracted value for it to get.
Thus, there may be no LHS values at all.
```

Author: Revised

> In current Dafny, this form of exceptional return requires that the caller and callee each have only one output value, namely a value of this special failure-compatible extract-omitting type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In current Dafny,
this form of exceptional return requires that the caller and callee each have only one output value,
namely a value of this special failure-compatible extract-omitting type.
```

Author: Revised

> TODO: Say more when the above restriction is lifted.

Reviewer 2: Is this TODO still applicable? Do we need another issue for it?

Author: Implementation completed.

### Chaining calls with potential failure

Routinely using a first output value that has a failure-compatible type allows a programming style like that shown in the following example, using the `Outcome` class shown above.

```

> method open(i: int) return (r: Outcome<int>) {

Reviewer: Was the intention that this method be called `a`?

Author: Removed this example

>   if (i < 0) return Failure("negative argument to a");

Reviewer: Throughout this example, then "then" branch of each `if` statement must be enclosed in curly braces. Also, the parentheses around the `if` guard can be omitted.

Author: Example removed

  return Success(i+i);
}

method b(i: int) return (r: Outcome<bool>) {
  if (i == 0) return Failure(zero argument to b");
  return Success(100/i);
}

method c(i: int) return (r: Outcome<string>) {
  if (i > 100) return Failure(big argument to c");
  if (i > 0) Success("positive");
  if (i < 0) Success("negative");

>   if (i == 0) Success("zero");

Reviewer: These "then" branches also need the keyword `return`. Optionally, L364 only needs the `return`, not the `if`. Or, these three `if` statements can be written as follows:

```
if
case 0 < i => return Success("positive");
case i < 0 => return Success("negative");
case i == 0 => return Success("zero");
```

Author: Removed the example

}

method m(i: int) return (r: Outcome<bool>){
  var aa: int := a(i); // returns if i < 0
  var bb: bool := b(i); // returns if i == 0

>   var cc: string := c(i); // returns if i > 100

Reviewer: These lines should use `:-`, not `:=`.

Please run this whole example through Dafny to make sure there are no typos or other errors.

Author: Removed the example

  return Success(true);
}
```

TODO: Instead of requiring PropagateFailure, instead just desugar by calling
CallerType.newFailure(this.error);

> 

Author: Removed, but it was a reminder of a proposed simpler alternative.

### Failure returns and exceptions

The `:-` mechanism for exceptional returns is like the exceptions used in other programming languages, with some similarities and differences.

>    * There is essentially just one kind of 'exception' in Dafny, the variations of the failure-compatible data type. Information about the failure is carried in the error message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * There is essentially just one kind of 'exception' in Dafny,
   the variations of the failure-compatible data type.
   Information about the failure is carried in the error message.
```

Author: Done

>    * A caller indicates that it accepts exceptional reeturns by declaring its first output to have a failure-compatible type. This is analogous to declaring that a method (e.g. in Java) might throw an exception.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * A caller indicates that it accepts exceptional returns by declaring its first output to have a failure-compatible type.
   This is analogous to declaring that a method (e.g. in Java) might throw an exception.
```

Author: Revised

>    * There is no such thing as an undeclared exception in Dafny. If a caller does not itself allow a failure output value, then that caller mayu nbot use `:-` and must receive any failure values from methods it calls using `:=`and then do something appropriate with the value. Because the failure value from the callee must be explicitly received, it cannot be silently ignored. (This is true of all the outputs from a called method.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * There is no such thing as an undeclared exception in Dafny.
   If a caller does not itself allow a failure output value,
   then that caller may not use `:-` and must receive any failure values from methods it calls using `:=,
   and then do something appropriate with the value.
   Because the failure value from the callee must be explicitly received,
   it cannot be silently ignored.
   This is true of all the outputs from a called method.
```

Author: Revised/corrected/partially obsolete

is diagnosed as a label in which the user forgot the **label** keyword.

## Update with Failure Statement (`:-`)
````grammar
UpdateFailureStmt  =
    [ Lhs { "," Lhs } ]
    ":-"
    [ "expect" ]
    Expression(allowLemma: false, allowLambda: false) { "," Rhs } 
````

An update statement using `:-` instead of `:=` exits execution of a method immediately 
if a failure is reported. 
This is a language feature somewhat analogous to exceptions in other languages.

To use this form of update,

 * the caller must have a first out-parameter whose type matches the output of `PropagateFailure` applied to the first output of the callee

>  * if the RHS of the update-with-failure statement is a method call, the first out-parameter of the callee must be failure-compatible

Author: OK

 * if instead the RHS of the update-with-failure statement is one or more expressions, the first of these expressions must be a value with a failure-compatible type

>  * if the failure-compatible type of the RHS does not have an Extract method,

Author: Made this change in every relevant place

then the LHS of the `:-` statement has one less expression than the RHS 
(or than the number of out-parameters from the method call)

>  * if the failure-compatible type of the RHS does have an Extract method,

Author: Ditto

then the LHS of the `:-` statement has the same numnber of expressions as the RHS 

> (or than the number of out-parameters from the method call)

Author: OK

and the type of the first LHS expression must be assignable from the return type of the Extract method
* the IsFailure, PropagateFailure and Extract methods may not be ghost

A failure-compatible type is a type that has the following (each with no in-parameters and one out-parameter):

 * a method or function `IsFailure()` that returns a `bool`

>  * a method or function `PropagateFailure()` that returns a value assignable to the first out-parameter of the caller

Reviewer: "that returns a value assignable to the first out-parameter of the caller" makes the definition of failure-compatible type depend on a context. It seems cleaner to me to omit this part of the definition, and instead say something about the return type of `PropagateFailure` in the other bulleted list (as is already done).

 * an optional method or function `Extract()`

### Failure compatible types

> 

Reviewer: Move this sub-sub-section earlier, and put the definition of failure-compatible types into this sub-sub-section.

A simple failure-compatible type is the following:
```dafny
{% include Example-Fail1.dfy %}
```

A commonly used alternative that carries some value information is something like this generic type:
```dafny
{% include Example-Fail2.dfy %}
```

> A failure-compatible type with an `Extract` method is called _value-carrying_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A failure-compatible type with an `Extract` member is called _value-carrying_.
```

```dafny
method Callee(i: int) returns (r: Status)
{
  if i < 0 { return Failure("negative"); }
  return Success;
}

method Caller(i: int) returns (rr: Status)
{
  :- Callee(i);
  ...
}
```

Note that there is no LHS to the `:-` statement. 
If `Callee` returns `Failure`, then the caller immediately returns, 
not executing any statements following the call of `Callee`. 
The value returned by `Caller` (the value of `rr` in the code above) is the result of `PropagateFailure` applied to the value returned by `Callee`, which is often just the same value. 
If `Callee` does not return `Failure` (that is, returns a value for which `IsFailure()` is `false`) 
then that return value is forgotten and execution proceeds normally with the statements following the call of `callee` in the body of `Caller`.

### Status return with additional outputs

The example in the previous subsection affects the program only through side effects or the status return itself. 
It may well be convenient to have additional out-parameters, as is allowed for `:=` updates;
these out-parameters behave just as for `:=`.
Here is an example:

```dafny
method Callee(i: int) returns (r: Status, v: int, w: int)
{

>   if i < 0 { return Failure("negative"); }

Reviewer: This `return` statement is not legal. Since the enclosing method has 3 out-parameters, the `return` statement must either have 0 arguments or 3 arguments. Here are three possible ways to make it legal:

* Pass specific out-values for `v` and `w`:
  ```
  return Failure("negative"), 0, 0;
  ```

* Pass the current values of `v` and `w` as out-values:
  ```
  return Failure("negative"), v, w;
  ```

* Only assign to `r`, and then return from the method:
  ```
  r := Failure("negative");
  return;
  ```

>   return Success(i), i+i, i*i;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return Success, i+i, i*i;
```

The `Success` constructor in the example code above does not take any argument.

Author: Right.

}

method Caller(i: int) returns (rr: Status, k: int)
{
  var j: int;
  j, k :- Callee(i);
  k := k + k;
}
```

Here `Callee` has two outputs in addition to the `Status` output. 
The LHS of the `:-` statement accordingly has two l-values to receive those outputs. 

> Those outputs may be any sort of l-values;

Reviewer: This line is confusing. "Outputs" seems appropriate for describing the values coming back in the formal out-parameters. But in L339, "outputs" is referring to the LHSs. You could say:

> As usual, the actual out-parameters can be any kind of l-values;

Author: Reworded

here they are a local variable and an out-parameter of the caller.
Those outputs are assigned in the `:-` call regardless of the `Status` value:

   * If `Callee` returns a failure value as its first output, then the other outputs are assigned, the _caller's_ first out-parameter (here `rr`) is assigned the value of `PropagateFailure`, and the caller returns.
   * If `Callee` returns a non-failure value as its first output, then the other outputs are assigned and the 
caller continues execution as normal.

### Failure-returns with additional data

The failure-compatible return value can carry additional data as shown in the `Outcome<T>` example above. 
In this case there is a (first) LHS l-value to receive this additional data.

```dafny
method Callee(i: int) returns (r: Outcome<nat>, v: int)
{

>   if i < 0 { return Failure("negative"); }

Reviewer: Illegal `return` statement, see previous comments. In this case, the correction should be

    return Failure("negative"), -2;

since the text below says `v` returns as `-2` in the failure case.

Author: Reviewed and fixed all the return statements, including in desugarings

This keyword states that the RHS evaluation is expected to be successful: if the failure-compatible value is a failure, then the program halts immediately (precisely as with the `expect` statement); if the return value is not a failure, the semantics is as described in previous sub-sections.

### Key points

There are several points to note.

 * The first out-parameter of the callee is special. 
It has a special type and that type indicates that the value is inspected to see if an immediate return 
from the caller is warranted. 
This type is often a datatype, as shown in the examples above, but it may be any type with the appropriate members.
 * The restriction on the type of caller's first out-parameter is
just that is must be possible (perhaps through generic instantiation and type inference, as in these examples) for `PropagateFailure` applied to the failure-compatible output from the callee to produce a value of the caller's first out-parameter type.
If the caller's first out-parameter type is failure-compatible (which it need not be),
 then failures can be propagated up the call chain. 
 * In the statement `j, k :- callee(i);`,

>  when the callee's return value has an `Extract method`, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 when the callee's return value has an `Extract` member, 
```

Author: OK

as it must be possible for the callee's `PropagateFailure` to return a value of the caller's failure-compatible type. 
In practice this means that one such failure-compatible type should be used for an entire program. 
If a Dafny program uses a library shared by multiple programs, the library should supply such a type and it should be used by all the client programs (and, effectively, all Dafny libraries). 
It is also the case that it is inconvenient to mix types such as `Outcome` and `Status` above within the same program.
If there is a mix of failure-compatible types, then the program will need to use `:=` statements and code for 
explicit handling of failure values.

### Failure returns and exceptions

The `:-` mechanism for exceptional returns is like the exceptions used in other programming languages, with some similarities and differences.

 * There is essentially just one kind of 'exception' in Dafny, 
the variations of the failure-compatible data type. 
 * Exceptions are passed up the call stack whether or not intervening methods are aware of the possibility of an exception, 
that is, whether or not the intervening methods have declared that they throw exceptions.

> Not so in Dafny: a failure is passed up the call stack only if each caller has a failure-compatible first out-parameter, is itself called in a `:-=` statement, and returns a value that responds true to `IsFailure()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not so in Dafny: a failure is passed up the call stack only if each caller has a failure-compatible first out-parameter, is itself called in a `:-` statement, and returns a value that responds true to `IsFailure()`.
```

Author: Fixed

is diagnosed as a label in which the user forgot the **label** keyword.

## Update with Failure Statement (`:-`)
````grammar
UpdateFailureStmt  =
    [ Lhs { "," Lhs } ]
    ":-"
    [ "expect" ]
    Expression(allowLemma: false, allowLambda: false) { "," Rhs } 
````

A `:-` statement is similar to a `:=` statement, but allows for immediate return if a failure is detected.
This is a language feature somewhat analogous to exceptions in other languages.

An update-with-failure statement uses _failure-compatible_ types.
A failure-compatible type is a type that has the following members (each with no in-parameters and one out-parameter):

 * a function method `IsFailure()` that returns a `bool`
 * a function method `PropagateFailure()` that returns a value assignable to the first out-parameter of the caller
 * an optional method or function `Extract()`

> A failure-compatible type with an `Extract` method is called _value-carrying_.

Reviewer: `Extract` can be either a method or a function, right? Same comments applies to every mention of `Extract`.

Author: Changed to member everywhere

### Expect alternative

In any of the above described uses of `:-`, the `:-` token may be followed immediately by the keyword `expect`.
This keyword states that the RHS evaluation is expected to be successful: 
if the failure-compatible value is a failure, then the program halts immediately (precisely as with the `expect` statement); 
if the return value is not a failure, the semantics is as described in previous sub-sections.

The equivalent desugaring replaces
```dafny
if tmp.IsFailure() {
  return tmp.PropagateFailure();
}
```
with
```dafny

> expect !tmp.IsFailure(), temp;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expect !tmp.IsFailure(), tmp;
```

Author: Right

### Failure returns and exceptions

> The `:-` mechanism like the exceptions used in other programming languages, with some similarities and differences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `:-` mechanism is like the exceptions used in other programming languages, with some similarities and differences.
```

Author: Fixed
